author: Pauli Brattico
year: 2020
date: Novemember
study_id: 37
only_first_solution: True
logging: True
ignore_ungrammatical_sentences: True

datatake_resources: True
datatake_resource_sequence: False
datatake_timings: False
datatake_images: False

image_parameter_stop_after_each_image: True
image_parameter_show_words: True
image_parameter_nolabels: False
image_parameter_spellout: False
image_parameter_case: False
image_parameter_show_sentences: False
image_parameter_show_glosses: True

closure: Z

positive_spec_selection: 0
negative_spec_selection: 0
break_head_comp_relations: 0
negative_tail_test: 0
positive_head_comp_selection: 0
negative_head_comp_selection: 0
negative_semantics_match: 0
lf_legibility_condition: -100
negative_adverbial_test: -100
positive_adverbial_test: 100

